This collection item is the interior model for l'Aubette, made by Theo van Doesburg. The model is a colour design for a ceiling and three walls, for a cinema and dance hall of Café de l'Aubette in Strasbourg, France. It is a dazzlingly incongruous expression of the 1920s De Stijl movement. Designed by Theo van Doesburg, one of the movement’s founders and leading lights, the Aubette’s minimalist, geometric aesthetic was heavily influenced by the work of contemporary artists such as Piet Mondrian. In designing the café’s interiors, Van Doesburg sought to do more than simply place viewers before a painting; he wanted to envelop them in it. The design, from 1926, is for Café Aubette, one of De Stijl's most important architectural projects. As the pioneer of Dutch De Stijl movement, Theo van Doesburg employed his perspective on elementarism and the neo-plastic style to decorate the ceiling and wall of cinema-ballroom with orthogonal composition in primary colors. 
It was made with pencil and gouache on cardboard, and it is 43 by 74.5 centimeters. It is the only model by Van Doesburg to survive after his death in 1931. At first sight, it seems to be a one-dimensional work. But the walls open outwards, as can be clearly seen in a photo from Van Doesburg’s studio. The model shows how Van Doesburg approached space as the synthesis of painting and architecture. The work is shown as it was acquired: framed. For decades, it was owned by the Swiss Galerie Gmurzynska and it was previously exhibited there as an autonomous visual work, framed on the wall. But such a strictly disciplinary approach was exactly what Van Doesburg was against: for him, a visual work could be an architectural project, model and autonomous artwork all at the same time. It is on display at het Nieuwe Instituut in Rotterdam, The Netherlands. In 1926, three avant-garde artists Theo van Doesburg, Sophie Taeuber-Arp and Jean Arp (or Hans Arp) were commissioned by Paul and Adré Horn to redecorate and design the Café Aubette in Strasbourg. Three artists were equally responsible for different sections of the building. Theo van Doesburg was in charge of the two cafés and two dance halls, Sophie Taeuber for the entrance aisle, tearoom, and two bars, and Jean Arp for the basement, the passage, and billiard room. And all three artists worked together designing the stairwell. The work of the three artists had been called "the Sistine Chapel of abstract art". This historical building still opens as a historical landmark nowadays.